The Apache Guacamole website
============================

This repository contains the source for the website of [Apache
Guacamole](http://guacamole.apache.org/), a clientless remote desktop gateway.

The website itself is completely static, being automatically generated by
[Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) prior to deployment. The content of the website
is written in a mixture of HTML and Markdown, with dynamic portions written
using [liquid templating](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/templates/). Templated
content is interpreted only a build time, with the final result being
completely static.

To facilitate ease of development and testing, this repository also contains a
build script, `build.sh`, the usage of which is documented below.

Table of contents
-----------------

* [Repository structure](#repository-structure)
* [Build prerequisites](#build-prerequisites)
* [Testing changes locally](#testing-changes-locally)
* [Publishing changes](#publishing-changes)

Repository structure
--------------------

In addition to the `LICENSE` and `NOTICE` files required of any proper Apache-
licensed project, the repository contains the following critical files:

| Filename      | Description
| ------------- | -----------
| `_config.yml` | Configuration information controlling the Jekyll build.  This is a standard Jekyll file. See: [Jekyll directory structure](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/structure/)
| `add-tracking.pl` | Utility script which edits specified HTML files in-place, adding the project's Google Analytics tracking code at the end of the `<body>` (requires Perl).
| `build.sh`    | The website build script (usage documented below).
| `doc/`        | Per-release documentation for Apache Guacamole. This directory contains one subdirectory per release, where each subdirectory contains the overall manual (`.../gug/`) API documentation for each part of the Guacamole core (`.../libguac/`, `.../guacamole-common/`, etc.). Files in this directory are not interpreted by Jekyll, as there are far too many files for this to be reasonable. They are instead copied into place by the `build.sh` script.
| `images/`     | Images which are referenced within the website HTML and CSS.
| `pub/`        | Miscellaneous public files, such as test scripts. The test scripts in this directory have historically been shared to users to help with debugging.
| `styles/`     | All CSS files referenced by the website HTML.
| `_companies/` | Documents which contain metadata describing third-party companies that provide support for Apache Guacamole. The content of these documents is rendered as the description for that company on the support page.
| `_includes/`  | Common HTML fragments used by Jekyll and referenced in other templates, such as the website header and footer. These *must* be HTML only. This is a standard Jekyll directory. See: [Jekyll directory structure](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/structure/)
| `_layouts/`   | Templates describing the structure of different types of content. This is a standard Jekyll directory. See: [Jekyll directory structure](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/structure/)
| `_links/`     | Documents which contain metadata describing the links which should appear in the site navigation menu. The documents here are completely empty except for the metadata.
| `_releases`   | Release notes for Guacamole releases, including metadata describing the files and documentation associated with those releases.

Build prerequisites
-------------------

The build depends entirely on Jekyll, thus this must be installed first. If you
do not yet have Jekyll installed, please see [Jekyll's own installation
instructions](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/installation/) to get started.

Beyond Jekyll, you will also need:

* A POSIX-compliant implementation of `sh` (to run `build.sh`)
* git (to clone this repository and to publish changes)
* `mktemp` (used by `build.sh` when staging changes prior to publishing)

The `build.sh` script will check whether the required programs are installed,
and will fail early with an appropriate message if a required program cannot be
found.

The build script handles three primary variations of common build tasks:

1. The build itself, when invoked as `./build.sh`. This invokes Jekyll and recursively copies the `doc/` (part of the website source) and `_site/` (generated by Jekyll during the build) to the `content/` directory.
2. Serving a local copy of the website, when invoked as `./build.sh PORT`.
3. Staging local changes for commit to the special "asf-site" branch, when invoked as `./build.sh stage`. Once changes are committed and pushed to "asf-site", the public website will be updated by the ASF's gitpubsub.

Testing changes locally
-----------------------

To test your changes to the website, you can either invoke `./build.sh` to build a static copy of the site to the `content/` subdirectory, or invoke `./build.sh PORT` (where `PORT` a TCP port number) to both build the static copy of the site *and* run Ruby's web server to serve `content/` locally at the given port:

    $ ./build.sh 8080
    Configuration file: /home/mjumper/apache-guacamole/guacamole-website/_config.yml
                Source: /home/mjumper/apache-guacamole/guacamole-website
           Destination: /home/mjumper/apache-guacamole/guacamole-website/_site
     Incremental build: disabled. Enable with --incremental
          Generating...
                        done in 0.563 seconds.
     Auto-regeneration: disabled. Use --watch to enable.
    Copying "doc/" and built site to "content/" ...
    Done. Full site is now within the "content/" directory.
    [2016-04-26 12:35:36] INFO  WEBrick 1.3.1
    [2016-04-26 12:35:36] INFO  ruby 2.1.7 (2015-08-18) [x86_64-linux]
    [2016-04-26 12:35:36] INFO  WEBrick::HTTPServer#start: pid=18927 port=8080

When done testing your local changes, press `Ctrl`&nbsp;+&nbsp;`C` to stop the
web server and return to the shell.

Publishing changes
------------------

Changes to the website are published using Apache's
[gitpubsub](https://blogs.apache.org/infra/entry/git_based_websites_available)
which relies on a special branch called "asf-site" containing *all website
content* within a directory called `content/`.

In the Apache Guacamole website repository, the "asf-site" branch is an "orphan"
branch. The branch has no commits in common with the "master" branch and
consists solely of the `content/` subdirectory. Updating the website thus
involves:

1. Making and testing your changes locally
2. Replacing the entire contents of the `content/` directory within "asf-site"
   with the newly-generated `content/` directory.

The `build.sh` script can take care of all this for you when invoked as
`./build.sh stage`:

    $ ./build.sh stage
    Configuration file: /home/mjumper/apache-guacamole/guacamole-website/_config.yml
                Source: /home/mjumper/apache-guacamole/guacamole-website
           Destination: /home/mjumper/apache-guacamole/guacamole-website/_site
     Incremental build: disabled. Enable with --incremental
          Generating...
                        done in 0.568 seconds.
     Auto-regeneration: disabled. Use --watch to enable.
    Copying "doc/" and built site to "content/" ...
    Done. Full site is now within the "content/" directory.
    Switched to branch 'asf-site'
    Removing README.md
    Removing _site/
    Content staged for commit. Use git to commit the results when ready.
    NOTE: The build.sh script will no longer exist. To serve the staged
    contents, run:

        ruby -run -e httpd content/ -p PORT

    where PORT is the port number where the HTTP server should listen.
    $

At this point, you will be on the "asf-site" branch and the current directory
will contain only the `content/` subdirectory:

    $ ls
    content
    $

Keep in mind that the new content is only *staged* for commit. It has not yet
been committed. Once you have verified that the staged content is as expected,
commit your changes (along with a useful commit message describing the changes
at a high level) using `git commit` and publish the update using
`git push origin`.

If you wish to unstage your changes, use `git reset --hard HEAD` to return to
the original state of "asf-site", wiping out any local modifications made by
`build.sh`. You can then return to whichever branch you were working on with
`git checkout`.

