---

released: true
archived: true
title: 0.9.11-incubating
date: 2017-02-02 09:24:00 -0800
summary: >
    Two-factor authentication, password policies, improvements to Docker and
    LDAP.

artifact-url: "https://archive.apache.org/dist/{}"
checksum-url: "https://archive.apache.org/dist/{}"
download-path: "incubator/guacamole/0.9.11-incubating/"
checksum-suffixes:
    "MD5" : ".md5"
    "SHA" : ".sha"
    "PGP" : ".asc"

source-dist:
    - "source/guacamole-client-0.9.11-incubating.tar.gz"
    - "source/guacamole-server-0.9.11-incubating.tar.gz"

binary-dist:
    - "binary/guacamole-0.9.11-incubating.war"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-duo-0.9.11-incubating.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-jdbc-0.9.11-incubating.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-ldap-0.9.11-incubating.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-noauth-0.9.11-incubating.tar.gz"

documentation:
    "Manual"              : "/doc/0.9.11-incubating/gug"
    "guacamole-common"    : "/doc/0.9.10-incubating/guacamole-common"
    "guacamole-common-js" : "/doc/0.9.10-incubating/guacamole-common-js"
    "guacamole-ext"       : "/doc/0.9.11-incubating/guacamole-ext"
    "libguac"             : "/doc/0.9.11-incubating/libguac"

---


The 0.9.11-incubating release features support for two-factor authentication,
password policies (complexity rules, preventing password reuse, etc.), and
the ability to use the Docker images with arbitrary Guacamole extensions, not
just MySQL, PostgreSQL, and LDAP. If using both a database and LDAP, new
settings allow you to restrict access to only those users which exist in the
database, rather than allowing any LDAP user access.

**This release contains changes which break compatibility with past releases.**
Please see the [deprecation / compatibility
notes](#deprecation--compatibility-notes) section for more information.


Two-factor authentication
-------------------------

Guacamole now provides support for two-factor authentication, and includes
a new extension which integrates with Duo using their "Auth API". Users who use
the Duo authentication service can add Guacamole to their list of applications.
Once configured, Guacamole will then require confirmation from Duo before
allowing an otherwise successful authentication attempt to proceed.

With this first implementation of two-factor authentication completed, support
for other two-factor authentication services is expected to follow.

 * [GUACAMOLE-136](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-136) - Add support for TFA - initially Duo

Password policies
-----------------

The database authentication extensions can now be configured to enforce
password complexity rules, including requiring specific classes of characters,
disallowing passwords containing the user's username, and preventing previous
passwords from being reused. Users can also now be required to change their
password regularly, or prevented from changing their password too frequently.

 * [GUACAMOLE-36](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-36) - Add support for password policies

Docker improvements
-------------------

The Guacamole Docker image previously only supported the official MySQL,
PostgreSQL, and LDAP extensions, with configuration automatically generated
based on environment variables. No support for deploying other extensions was
provided. As of 0.9.11-incubating, arbitrary extensions and their configuration
files can be deployed through providing a template `GUACAMOLE_HOME` directory.

The requirement that the Guacamole Docker image be linked to the guacd Docker
image has also been lifted. Though Guacamole still requires a connection to
guacd, that connection can now be described using the `GUACD_HOSTNAME` and
`GUACD_PORT` environment variables.

 * [GUACAMOLE-99](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-99) - Do not require Docker link for guacd
 * [GUACAMOLE-100](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-100) - Support arbitrary extensions within Guacamole Docker image

LDAP improvements
-----------------

For the common case where Guacamole's LDAP support is used purely for
authentication, with an MySQL or PostgreSQL database used to house connection
data, it is now possible to configure the database authentication extensions
to reject authentication attempts for users which are not defined in the
database. For those whose LDAP directories contain many users that will never
be granted access to Guacamole, these new settings mean that such users can
be denied access immediately, rather than presenting them with an empty and
useless Guacamole home screen.

In addition, if your LDAP directory was so extensive that it exceeded the
default query size limit of 1000 records, the query size limit can now be
manually increased within `guacamole.properties`.

 * [GUACAMOLE-70](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-70) - Add option to restrict access to users within database
 * [GUACAMOLE-79](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-79) - Add an option to allow the default LDAP result size limit (1000) to be overridden

Capacity regression from 0.9.10-incubating
------------------------------------------

The new screen sharing support added in 0.9.10-incubating lead to a regression
which could cause connections to fail when the maximum number of file
descriptors supported by `select()` was exceeded. This effectively limited the
maximum number of connections a Guacamole server could support, regardless of
how powerful the server might otherwise be. This has been fixed, and Guacamole
has been refactored to use `poll()` instead of `select()`.

 * [GUACAMOLE-118](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-118) - Migrate from select() to poll()

Miscellaneous fixes / improvements
----------------------------------

This latest release of Guacamole also addresses potential resource leaks in the
use of SSL/TLS by guacd, segfaults in the built-in terminal emulator and VNC
client, and adds a Norwegian translation for the Guacamole interface.

 * [GUACAMOLE-86](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-86) - Connection closed when printing large content in SSH
 * [GUACAMOLE-117](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-117) - File descriptor leak if SSL/TLS negotiation fails
 * [GUACAMOLE-130](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-130) - Merge contributed Norwegian translation
 * [GUACAMOLE-157](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-157) - Connecting to unavailable VNC endpoint causes SIGSEGV in SSH SSL lock free


Deprecation / Compatibility notes
=================================

As of 0.9.11-incubating, the following changes have been made which affect
compatibility with past releases:


Database schema changes
-----------------------

The MySQL and PostgreSQL schemas have changed to facilitate support for
password policies. Users of the database authentication will need to run the
`upgrade-pre-0.9.11.sql` script specific to their chosen database.

