---

released: true
archived: true
title: 0.9.14
date: 2018-01-18 09:47:00 -0800
summary: >
    OpenID Connect single sign-on, SQL Server support, CAS "ClearPass", user
    login/logout history, fixes and improvements for RDP, clipboard, file
    transfer, and terminal emulation.

artifact-url: "https://archive.apache.org/dist/{}"
checksum-url: "https://archive.apache.org/dist/{}"
download-path: "guacamole/0.9.14/"
checksum-suffixes:
    "MD5" : ".md5"
    "SHA" : ".sha"
    "PGP" : ".asc"

source-dist:
    - "source/guacamole-client-0.9.14.tar.gz"
    - "source/guacamole-server-0.9.14.tar.gz"

binary-dist:
    - "binary/guacamole-0.9.14.war"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-cas-0.9.14.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-duo-0.9.14.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-jdbc-0.9.14.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-header-0.9.14.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-ldap-0.9.14.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-noauth-0.9.14.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-openid-0.9.14.tar.gz"

documentation:
    "Manual"              : "/doc/0.9.14/gug"
    "guacamole-common"    : "/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-common"
    "guacamole-common-js" : "/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-common-js"
    "guacamole-ext"       : "/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext"
    "libguac"             : "/doc/0.9.14/libguac"

---


The 0.9.14 release features new support for OpenID Connect, SQL Server
databases, pass-through of user credentials for CAS, and tracking of user
login/logout history. Various fixes and improvements for RDP, clipboard, file
transfer, and terminal emulation have also been implemented.

**This release contains changes which break compatibility with past releases.**
Please see the [deprecation / compatibility
notes](#deprecation--compatibility-notes) section for more information.


Support for OpenID Connect
--------------------------

OpenID Connect, a single sign-on (SSO) solution built atop the OAuth 2.0
framework, is now supported by Guacamole as a source of user identity. Similar
to the [support for CAS added in
0.9.13-incubating](/releases/0.9.13-incubating/#support-for-cas-single-sign-on),
this new extension allows Guacamole to delegate authentication to the identity
provider implementing OpenID Connect.

Note that this new extension only deals with determining the identity of users
that have authenticated through OpenID, and redirecting unauthenticated users
to the configured OpenID identity provider to authenticate. The details of the
connections available to each user must be provided via another extension, such
as the [database authentication](/doc/0.9.14/gug/jdbc-auth.html).

 * [GUACAMOLE-210](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-210) - Add support for SSO via OpenID Connect


Support for SQL Server
----------------------

In addition to MySQL and PostgreSQL, Guacamole now supports using SQL Server as
a database backend. This support is built off the same core that drives the
MySQL and PostgreSQL support, and thus includes the same screen sharing,
administration, connection tracking, etc. features.

 * [GUACAMOLE-363](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-363) - Support Microsoft SQL Server Authentication


CAS credential pass-through with "ClearPass"
--------------------------------------------

The [support for CAS added in
0.9.13-incubating](/releases/0.9.13-incubating/#support-for-cas-single-sign-on)
now supports credential pass-through using CAS' "ClearPass" feature. If the CAS
system in use has "ClearPass" enabled, and Guacamole has been provided with the
key necessary to decrypt received credentials, Guacamole will automatically
make user credentials available for inclusion within connection parameters via
the `${GUAC_USERNAME}` and `${GUAC_PASSWORD}` [parameter
tokens](/doc/0.9.14/gug/configuring-guacamole.html#parameter-tokens).

 * [GUACAMOLE-362](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-362) - CAS authentication and ClearPass


Tracking of user login/logout history
-------------------------------------

While Guacamole has always logged user login/logout events, overall user access
history has only been tracked at the database level on a per-connection basis.
Guacamole now provides support for tracking the times that each user logs into
or out of Guacamole, recording this information within a dedicated database
table. The last time that each user was active is also exposed within the
user administration interface, allowing inactive/stale user accounts to be
more easily identified.

 * [GUACAMOLE-394](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-394) - Record user login / logout history


Export connection history to CSV
--------------------------------

For the sake of using connection history data within external tools, Guacamole
now supports exporting the connection history data shown within the
admininstration interface to a CSV file. The exported data takes the current
sort order and filter into account.

 * [GUACAMOLE-334](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-334) - Provide connection history export from admin UI


`/etc/guacamole` as default `GUACAMOLE_HOME`
--------------------------------------------

Historically, `GUACAMOLE_HOME` has been a consistent source of confusion for
users, with many unnecessarily setting the `GUACAMOLE_HOME` environment
variable or going to extreme lengths to try to force the location to
`/etc/guacamole`, rather than simply using the default location. This confusion
was compounded by documentation which described `GUACAMOLE_HOME` from the
perspective of the system, rather than from the perspective of the user.

In an effort to make things less confusing, Guacamole now includes
`/etc/guacamole` as one of the default locations of `GUACAMOLE_HOME`, and the
wording of [the documentation covering
`GUACAMOLE_HOME`](/doc/0.9.14/gug/configuring-guacamole.html#guacamole-home)
has been clarified to avoid further confusion.

 * [GUACAMOLE-335](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-335) - Add /etc/guacamole to default search paths for GUACAMOLE_HOME


Clipboard behavior fixes
------------------------

Recent changes adding support for direct integration of the local clipboard
resulted in a pair of regressions which stripped newline characters from
clipboard contents and caused performance issues under Internet Explorer. These
issues have now been fixed.

 * [GUACAMOLE-128](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-128) - Clipboard sharing can crash IE
 * [GUACAMOLE-310](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-310) - Direct clipboard integration strips newlines


Restoration of support for event listeners
------------------------------------------

In order to provide a simpler mechanism for extensions to monitor and react to
user actions, the event listener API previously provided by Guacamole has been
restored. This API had been removed as part of the the migration to a new,
self-contained format for Guacamole extensions, however the new extension
format has been augmented to allow event listeners to once again be defined.

 * [GUACAMOLE-364](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-364) - Add support for authentication and tunnel event listeners


Connection load balancing and dynamic failover
----------------------------------------------

Guacamole's extension API defines the concept of "balancing groups" to cover
cases where what appears to be a single connection to a user must actually be
dynamically routed to one of several underlying ocnnections based on overall
load. Within the database authentication extension, the determination of load
has been based purely on the number of active connections to each underlying
connection. The database authentication extension has now been updated to
implement a weighted balancing algorithm, allowing the relative performance of
each connection to be manually specified or dynamically updated.

The behavior of balancing groups within the database extension has also been
updated to allow pecific connections may also be designated as failover-only,
reserving those connections for use only if no other connections are working.

 * [GUACAMOLE-102](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-102) - Load balancing based on resource
 * [GUACAMOLE-317](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-317) - Allow for failover-only connections


Docker multi-stage builds
-------------------------

Guacamole's Docker images have been updated to leverage multi-stage builds. For
users simply pulling the Docker images from Docker Hub, this has no real effect
other than slightly smaller images. For users building the Docker images
themselves, you will now need to use a recent version of Docker CE. Older
versions of Docker lack support for multi-stage builds, and will fail to build
the images.

 * [GUACAMOLE-408](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-408) - Use Docker multi-stage build to create guacamole image
 * [GUACAMOLE-409](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-409) - Include a Dockerfile in guacamole-manual


SSH/SFTP improvements
---------------------

Guacamole's support for SSH has been updated to include support for keep-alive
packets, allowing the connection to be kept alive despite lack of user input
when the SSH server is set to otherwise terminate such connections. Problems
with connecting to SSH servers at IPv6 addresses and with proper handling of
incorrect private keys have also been addressed.

If SFTP is being used for file transfer, whether for SSH, VNC, or RDP, the
directory used as the top-level (root) directory can now be configured,
isolating access to a particular directory and its subdirectories
rather than exposing the entire filesystem.

 * [GUACAMOLE-203](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-203) - Implementing ServerAliveInterval to keep SSH session alive
 * [GUACAMOLE-303](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-303) - Allow SFTP root directory to be configured
 * [GUACAMOLE-396](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-396) - guacd cannot connect to ssh servers with IPv6 addresses
 * [GUACAMOLE-400](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-400) - Connection segfaults when SSH private key fails to load


LDAP improvements
-----------------

Previously, if Guacamole was configured to use LDAP for authentication, and the
LDAP server required following referrals for queries involved in Guacamole's
authentication process, authentication against LDAP would fail. This issue has
been addressed, and Guacamole can now be configured to follow LDAP referrals.

An issue with handling of database account restrictions when users are
authenticated through LDAP has also been addressed. As long as the database
authentication is configured to require database accounts for all users,
database-specific access restrictions will be enforced.

 * [GUACAMOLE-243](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-243) - LDAP auth fails when search results include an LDAP referral
 * [GUACAMOLE-284](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-284) - Database "Account Restrictions" not applied when using LDAP


Fixes for CAS support
---------------------

With the recent addition of support for single sign-on using CAS, it was
discovered that the `${GUAC_USERNAME}` parameter token will not be populated in
cases where the user was authenticated against the CAS extension. This has now
been fixed, and the `${GUAC_USERNAME}` token will always be populated for all
users that have successfully authenticated through any mechanism.

Issues with the behavior of the Guacamole settings/preferences screen when the
CAS extension is installed, and with overall error handling and logging with
respect to CAS, have also been addressed. The settings/preferences screen
should now function normally, and errors from the CAS server should now be
correctly logged.

 * [GUACAMOLE-341](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-341) - GUAC_USERNAME token not defined if using SSO
 * [GUACAMOLE-355](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-355) - CAS Module Missing Error Handling
 * [GUACAMOLE-358](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-358) - CAS Authentication issue handling sessions


Extension hooks for logout and shutdown
---------------------------------------

Functions which are invoked upon user logout, session expiration, and/or server
shutdown have been added to the applicable interfaces of the Guacamole
extension API, allowing extensions to hook into these events to handle cleanup
of resources, synchronization of user signout, etc.

Note that because these new functions are defined at the interface level, all
extensions which implement these interfaces will need to implement these
functions. Please see the [deprecation / compatibility
notes](#deprecation--compatibility-notes) section for more information.

 * [GUACAMOLE-393](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-393) - Allow extensions to hook into logout / server shutdown


Restoration of Windows support for libguac
------------------------------------------

Although guacd has hard dependencies on Linux- or UNIX-specific features,
Guacamole historically supported Windows builds at least at the library level.
This support continued until recently, when changes resulted in libguac failing
to build on Windows platforms. Support for Windows builds of libguac has now
been restored, allowing development of Windows applications which leverage the
Guacamole protocol.

 * [GUACAMOLE-325](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-325) - Restore Windows compatibility for libguac / libguacd
 * [GUACAMOLE-337](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-337) - Move libguacd functionality into libguac


Miscellaneous fixes/improvements
--------------------------------

Among several other minor changes and fixes, this latest release of Guacamole
also addresses several low-impact memory leaks within guacamole-server, adds
support for redefining the terminal color palette SSH and telnet through the
console codes used by xterm, and fixes the behavior of file downloads for RDP
where the desired file contains multiple alternative streams.

 * [GUACAMOLE-279](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-279) - Add support for redefining the terminal color palette
 * [GUACAMOLE-326](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-326) - Alternative streams on Windows 10 result in multiple file downloads
 * [GUACAMOLE-328](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-328) - Documentation omits that libssl is required for ssh support
 * [GUACAMOLE-338](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-338) - Always display selected connections/groups within admin UI
 * [GUACAMOLE-339](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-339) - Add Remote Host IP to Guacamole Connection History table
 * [GUACAMOLE-345](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-345) - Ensure SQL scripts are compatible with PostgreSQL 8
 * [GUACAMOLE-346](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-346) - Improve performance of in-browser recording playback
 * [GUACAMOLE-357](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-357) - Update documentation for libjpeg-turbo dependency with respect to Ubuntu
 * [GUACAMOLE-383](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-383) - Failures to open guacd.conf, read RDP clipboard data, or load terminal font may leak memory
 * [GUACAMOLE-385](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-385) - HTTP tunnel uses incorrect content type for write operations
 * [GUACAMOLE-391](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-391) - guacd_conf_load() leaks structure if config file fails to parse
 * [GUACAMOLE-395](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-395) - User "expired" column not actually queried for MySQL
 * [GUACAMOLE-398](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-398) - guac_common_ssh_create_session() potentially leaks address info
 * [GUACAMOLE-402](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-402) - Out-of-tree build doesn't compile
 * [GUACAMOLE-411](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-411) - guacd_send_fd call's sendmsg with uninitialized buffer


Deprecation / Compatibility notes
=================================

As of 0.9.14, the following changes have been made which affect compatibility
with past releases:


Database schema changes
-----------------------

The MySQL and PostgreSQL schemas have changed, adding new columns to the
`guacamole_connection` table for specifying connection weight (for use in
weighted balancing) and for designating connections as failover-only, adding a
new column to `guacamole_connnection_history` for tracking the remote address
of each connecting user, and adding a new `guacamole_user_history` table for
tracking user login and logout.

Users of the database authentication will need to run the
`upgrade-pre-0.9.14.sql` script specific to their chosen database.

Extension API changes
---------------------

### Session and server shutdown hooks

The
[`AuthenticatedUser`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/AuthenticatedUser.html)
and
[`UserContext`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/UserContext.html)
interfaces now define an `invalidate()` function which is invoked when the
associated user session is being terminated due to logout, expiration, or
server shutdown. Because these new functions are defined at the
interface level, implementations of these interfaces will now need to define
these functions:

 * [`AuthenticatedUser.invalidate()`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/AuthenticatedUser.html#invalidate--)
 * [`UserContext.invalidate()`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/UserContext.html#invalidate--)

Similarly, the
[`AuthenticationProvider`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/AuthenticationProvider.html)
interface now defines a `shutdown()`
function which is invoked upon server shutdown. As with the new `invalidate()`
function, this function is defined at the interface level and will need to be
implemented by all classes implementing `AuthenticationProvider`:

 * [`AuthenticationProvider.shutdown()`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/AuthenticationProvider.html#shutdown--)

### Deprecation of `ConnectionRecordSet`

The
[`ConnectionRecordSet`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/ConnectionRecordSet.html)
interface and
[`SimpleConnectionRecordSet`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/simple/SimpleConnectionRecordSet.html)
class have been deprecated, replaced by the more generic
[`ActivityRecordSet`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/ActivityRecordSet.html)
interface and
[`SimpleActivityRecordSet`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/simple/SimpleActivityRecordSet.html)
class. Extensions using the old interface or class will continue to build, but
should be migrated over to the newer API as soon as possible.

### Additional history functions for `Connection` and `User`

The
[`Connection`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/Connection.html)
and
[`User`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/User.html)
interfaces now define essentially the same pair of
`getLastActive()` and `getHistory()` functions, as both types of objects now
have associated history within the extension API. For `Connection`, the only
new function here is `getLastActive()`:

 * [`Connection.getLastActive()`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/Connection.html#getLastActive--)

History tracking of users is entirely
new, however, and implementations of `User` will need to define both functions:

 * [`User.getHistory()`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/User.html#getHistory--)
 * [`User.getLastActive()`](/doc/0.9.14/guacamole-ext/org/apache/guacamole/net/auth/User.html#getLastActive--)

Note that extensions are not required to implement history tracking; if the
extension will not implement or expose such tracking, the implementations of
these functions can simply return nothing.

