---

released: true
archived: true
title: 1.2.0
date: 2020-06-28 23:50:26 -0700
summary: >
    Support for SAML 2.0, Wake-on-LAN, and easy switching between active
    connections, numerous fixes for RDP, improvements to TOTP, database
    support, and behavior on iOS devices.

artifact-url: "https://archive.apache.org/dist/{}"
checksum-url: "https://archive.apache.org/dist/{}"
download-path: "guacamole/1.2.0/"
checksum-suffixes:
    "PGP"     : ".asc"
    "SHA-256" : ".sha256"

source-dist:
    - "source/guacamole-client-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "source/guacamole-server-1.2.0.tar.gz"

binary-dist:
    - "binary/guacamole-1.2.0.war"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-cas-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-duo-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-header-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-jdbc-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-ldap-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-openid-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-quickconnect-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-saml-1.2.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-totp-1.2.0.tar.gz"

documentation:
    "Manual"              : "/doc/1.2.0/gug"
    "guacamole-common"    : "/doc/1.1.0/guacamole-common"
    "guacamole-common-js" : "/doc/1.2.0/guacamole-common-js"
    "guacamole-ext"       : "/doc/1.2.0/guacamole-ext"
    "libguac"             : "/doc/1.2.0/libguac"

---

The 1.2.0 release features support for SAML 2.0, Wake-on-LAN, and a new
interface for easily switching between multiple active connections. The general
behavior of the login interface has also been improved, as has the flexibility
of the TOTP support, which may now be used even with user accounts that do not
yet exist in the database.

**The 1.2.0 release is compatible with older 1.x components.** You should
upgrade older components to 1.2.0 when possible, however things should continue
to work correctly in the interim:

* Extensions written for older 1.x releases can be used by 1.2.0.
* Components written for the version of the Guacamole protocol used by older
  1.x releases can be used with components of the 1.2.0 release.


New features and improvements
-----------------------------

### Single sign-on with SAML 2.0

Similar to existing support for CAS and OpenID Connect, Guacamole now provides
support for SAML 2.0, allowing any identity provider implementing this standard
to function as a source of identity.

Note that this new extension only deals with determining the identity of users
that have authenticated via SAML (and redirecting unauthenticated users to the
configured identity provider so that they may authenticate). The details of the
connections available to each user must be provided via another extension, such
as the [database authentication](/doc/1.2.0/gug/jdbc-auth.html).

 * [GUACAMOLE-103](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-103) - SAML 2.0 support for user authentication

### Wake-on-LAN

Automatically activating machines using Wake-on-LAN is now supported for VNC,
RDP, SSH, and telnet connections. Additional connection parameters are
available which define how the Wake-on-LAN "Magic Packet" should be broadcast.
If enabled on a connection, the "Magic Packet" will be sent before attempting
to connect, signaling the desired machine to power up.

 * [GUACAMOLE-513](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-513) - Wake on LAN integration

### Easy switching between multiple connections

Users with access to multiple connections may now select from those connections
within the Guacamole menu while already using another connection. The
connection name that is displayed at the top of the Guacamole menu functions as
a drop-down menu from which any accessible connection may be selected.

Once multiple connections are running, connections that are running in the
background appear as thumbnails in a collapsible panel on the lower-right
corner of the screen. These thumbnails update in real-time, and clicking on a
thumbnail will switch to that connection without disconnecting.

 * [GUACAMOLE-723](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-723) - Support display of multiple connections within same tab

### Improved login behavior

When the Guacamole login dialog is displayed, the first blank login field will
now automatically be focused, allowing failed logins to be more easily retried.

In deployments where the login process may be lengthy, such as when dependent
on a response from a relatively slow database or LDAP server, the login form
will now disable itself and fade out to indicate that the form has been
submitted and the login attempt is being processed.

 * [GUACAMOLE-302](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-302) - Refocus relevant in-progress login fields after auth failure
 * [GUACAMOLE-742](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-742) - Display feedback while waiting for login

### Using TOTP with non-database user accounts

Guacamole's TOTP support can now be used alongside extensions like LDAP, so
long as a database is also configured. The former caveat that TOTP users must
have "Change own password" permission within the database no longer applies,
and Guacamole's various supported databases can now be configured to
automatically create user accounts for users that have successfully
authenticated.

 * [GUACAMOLE-708](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-708) - Allow database storage of arbitrary attributes for non-database users

### VNC support for usernames

Guacamole now supports username/password authentication for VNC in addition to
the standard password-only authentication. VNC servers that require a username
in addition to a password should now be accessible using Guacamole.

 * [GUACAMOLE-514](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-514) - Implement additional authentication methods for VNC

### Granular control of clipboard and file transfer

Copy and paste can now be individually disabled by the administrator on a
per-connection basis, allowing data transfer through the clipboard to be
tightly restricted.

File transfer has always been disabled unless explicitly enabled, however this
support can now be enabled while also disabling download or upload, allowing
file transfer to be restricted to a single direction.

 * [GUACAMOLE-381](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-381) - Allow clipboard access to be disabled
 * [GUACAMOLE-474](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-474) - Allow file upload and download to be enabled separately

### Improved control of LDAP group object structure

Guacamole's LDAP support now allows configuration of the type of groups used to
dictate access. While Guacamole previously assumed use of the `groupOfNames`
object class and its `member` attribute, other object classes like `posixGroup`
may now be used, and their corresponding member attributes may be defined.

 * [GUACAMOLE-300](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-300) - Support posixGroup in LDAP Authentication and Group-based Session Admission

### `guacenc` support for MPEG-4 containers

The optional `guacenc` utility that is part of guacamole-server will now
produce video within MPEG-4 container files, not just raw, containerless MPEG-4
video streams.

 * [GUACAMOLE-465](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-465) - Guacenc should support libavformat

### Support for SSL/TLS database connections

For MySQL and PostgreSQL servers that require SSL/TLS connections, Guacamole
now provides options to configure this. Additional properties within
`guacamole.properties` may be specified to allow/require use of SSL, as well as
to configure the level of certificate validation.

 * [GUACAMOLE-728](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-728) - Docker image unable to connect to MySQL8 docker: Public Key Retrieval Not Allowed

### Support for the MariaDB JDBC driver

While MySQL and MariaDB share a common origin and are generally compatible,
their corresponding JDBC drivers have diverged, and Guacamole's MySQL/MariaDB
support previously assumed that the MySQL driver would be used.

Guacamole now supports the MariaDB version of "Connector/J" in addition to the
MySQL version.

 * [GUACAMOLE-852](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-852) - Support MariaDB JDBC Driver

### Support for SQL Server instance names

SQL Server supports deploying multiple instances on the same server, with each
additional instance identified by its own unique name. If using SQL Server, and
your deployment uses named instances, the name of the instance containing the
Guacamole database can now be specified using the `sqlserver-instance`
property.

 * [GUACAMOLE-583](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-583) - SQL Instance Strings

Internationalization
--------------------

### Czech and Japanese translations of the web interface

The web interface of Guacamole has been translated into Czech and Japanese.
These languages will now be automatically selected if accessing Guacamole
from a browser where either is set as the preferred language, and can be
[manually selected](/doc/gug/using-guacamole.html#display-language) within
Guacamole's preferences.

 * [GUACAMOLE-821](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-821) - Add Japanese translation
 * [GUACAMOLE-781](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-781) - Add Czech translation

### Belgian French, Hungarian, and Latin American keymaps for RDP

Keymaps have been added to better support RDP servers which use the
Belgian French, Hungarian, or Latin American keyboard layouts. As always, bear
in mind that [the client side of Guacamole is independent of keyboard
layout](/faq/#does-guacamole-support-my-keyboard-layout). Additional keyboard
layouts for RDP are mainly of benefit if:

1. Your RDP server does not support Unicode events.
2. Your RDP server is set to a keyboard layout which is not the default (US English).

If your RDP server is set to US English and supports Unicode events, it should
not be necessary to select a specific layout. The user's local keyboard should
simply work, regardless of whether it matches the layout of the RDP server.

 * [GUACAMOLE-625](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-625) - Add Spanish Latam keyboard support
 * [GUACAMOLE-837](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-837) - Add RDP keymap for Hungarian keyboard layout
 * [GUACAMOLE-901](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-901) - Keyboard layout for Belgian French

### Updates to the French translation of the web interface

The existing French translation has been updated to take into account recent
changes to the web interface, adding French translations for portions of text
which previously would have been displayed in English as a fallback.

 * [GUACAMOLE-759](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-759) - update translation fr.json for guacamole-client

Bug fixes
---------

### Regressions due to FreeRDP 2.0.0 migration

Several regressions were identified following the Apache Guacamole 1.1.0
release which were due to [the massive migration from FreeRDP 1.x to FreeRDP
2.0.0](../1.1.0/#migration-to-freerdp-200) and primarily affected use of
RemoteApp, Hyper-V, and VirtualBox. These regressions have now been fixed, and
RDP connections involving these technologies should work as expected.

 * [GUACAMOLE-947](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-947) - Clipboard error message when connected to the RDP server
 * [GUACAMOLE-952](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-952) - Preconnection PDU support no longer works following migration to FreeRDP 2.0.0
 * [GUACAMOLE-962](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-962) - Cannot connect to VirtualBox RDP following migration to FreeRDP 2.0.0
 * [GUACAMOLE-978](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-978) - RemoteApp session to Windows Server 2016 closes after roughly 2-3 minutes
 * [GUACAMOLE-979](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-979) - RDP settings strings may be double-freed
 * [GUACAMOLE-1053](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1053) - guacd segfaults when user actively presses keys at RDP disconnect time
 * [GUACAMOLE-1076](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1076) - Another copy of RemoteApp is launched in case of session reconnect

### Audio input behavior

Following changes to the JavaScript API exposed by browsers for accessing audio
input streams, support for audio input within Guacamole ceased to function
correctly. This was due to:

 * A change in the return type of the `navigator.mediaDevices.getUserMedia()` function
 * Changes in Chrome's autoplay policy

Both causes have been addressed, and audio input should now function correctly.

 * [GUACAMOLE-732](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-732) - navigator.mediaDevices.getUserMedia() returns a promises
 * [GUACAMOLE-905](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-905) - Audio input broken on Chrome

### iPad and iOS 13 support

Users of iOS and iPadOS mobile devices reported erratic behavior of the
Guacamole interface following a system update, ultimately resulting in
inability to interact with remote desktops using touch mouse emulation. These
issues were determined to be due to changes in iOS Safari's handling of the
browser viewport, and have been corrected by updating Guacamole's interface to
be independent of the aspects that changed.

 * [GUACAMOLE-810](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-810) - Ipad screen jumps upwards while user focuses on Text Input.
 * [GUACAMOLE-883](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-883) - Touch mouse emulation no longer works as of iOS 13

### Login screen behavior on Firefox

When logging into Guacamole using Firefox, the "Enter" key could become
effectively stuck if used to submit the login form. This was due to the lack of
a corresponding `keyup` event for the key used to submit the form. This issue
has been corrected such that any tracked keyboard state will not be maintained
when Guacamole navigates between any of its pages.

 * [GUACAMOLE-817](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-817) - "Enter" key may repeat following login with Firefox

### RDP keyboard behavior

Guacamole's RDP support relies on dynamic keymap translation to ensure that
keyboard behavior is always dictated by the user's own keyboard layout, not the
keyboard layout of the RDP server. This translation did not function correctly
when Shift and Caps Lock were combined, as the remote state of Caps Lock was
not properly tracked.

This has been corrected, and Guacamole will now automatically take Caps Lock
into account when determining whether additional modifiers need to be pressed
(and whether any pressed modifiers need to be released).

The German keymap has also been corrected to include a definition for the
non-dead tilde key.

 * [GUACAMOLE-518](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-518) - Shift incorrectly sent for uppercase letters while Caps Lock is active
 * [GUACAMOLE-859](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-859) - Incorrect Caps Lock keysym sent to Windows via RDP
 * [GUACAMOLE-917](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-917) - Key mapping for German keyboards: ~ does not work

### VNC support for TLS

While Guacamole will automatically use TLS for VNC servers that require it, the
proper locking callbacks required for multithreaded use of TLS were not set,
resulting in unstable behavior. These callbacks are now correctly specified,
and connections to VNC servers requiring TLS should function correctly.

Beware that these callbacks are only supported in newer versions of
libvncclient. If the version of libvncclient installed lacks support for these
callbacks, a warning will be displayed when building guacamole-server noting
that TLS may not work correctly:

    checking for rfbClient.LockWriteToTLS... no
    checking for rfbClient.UnlockWriteToTLS... no
    configure: WARNING:
          --------------------------------------------
           This version of libvncclient lacks support
           for TLS locking.  VNC connections that use
           TLS may experience instability as documented
           in GUACAMOLE-414

 * [GUACAMOLE-414](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-414) - Certain VNC servers result in disconnection due to TLS errors

### Rendering of balancing groups

Guacamole is intended to render empty balancing groups as if they were
connections, keeping the balancing nature of those groups opaque to
non-administrative users. A regression in the 0.9.10-incubating release broke
this behavior, causing empty balancing groups to render as any empty
non-balancing group would. This has been corrected, and empty balancing groups
should now appear identical to normal connections.

 * [GUACAMOLE-823](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-823) - Empty balancing group does not render as connection

### SQL Server connection history query

A bug in the query used by Guacamole's SQL Server support caused searches
against the connection history to fail, instead producing the following error
in the logs:

    com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerException: Incorrect syntax near 'username'.

The error in the relevant SQL query has been corrected, and searches against
the connection history should now work as expected.

 * [GUACAMOLE-870](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-870) - Connection history query fails against SQL Server

### OpenID redirection loop

In certain cases, Guacamole's OpenID support would redirect the user back to
their IDP in a loop, despite the OpenID support being correctly configured and
the IDP behaving correctly. This was due to incorrect handling of the
`id_token` parameter within the URL, causing Guacamole to behave as if the
`id_token` were not present at all. This handling has been corrected, and users
should not encounter a redirect loop if OpenID is correctly configured.

 * [GUACAMOLE-805](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-805) - OpenID authentication may redirect to IDP in a loop

### RADIUS challenge rendering

A bug in Guacamole's RADIUS support resulted in the `Reply-Message =` portion
of the RADIUS challenge being presented to the user as if it were part of the
actual challenge message. This has been fixed. Only the challenge message
itself should now be displayed.

 * [GUACAMOLE-769](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-769) - Parse RADIUS Challenge Message Correctly

### RADIUS support for MS-CHAPv1 and MS-CHAPv2

Guacamole's RADIUS support was intended to support for MS-CHAPv1 and MS-CHAPv2
authentication protocols, however this would fail if the JVM in use lacked
support for the MD4 digest algorithm:

    No such RADIUS algorithm: MD4 MessageDigest not available

An implementation of MD4 is now bundled with the RADIUS support, and both
MS-CHAPv1 and MS-CHAPv2 should work as expected.

 * [GUACAMOLE-774](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-774) - RADIUS support for MS-CHAPv1 and MS-CHAPv2 fails

Miscellaneous fixes/improvements
--------------------------------

 * [GUACAMOLE-678](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-678) - And new UriGuacamoleProperty
 * [GUACAMOLE-684](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-684) - Insufficient Credentials Should Take Precedence over Invalid Credentials
 * [GUACAMOLE-734](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-734) - Update logback-classic version
 * [GUACAMOLE-736](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-736) - guacamole-auth-cas build fails against JDK 11
 * [GUACAMOLE-740](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-740) - Spanish translation contains hard-coded version number
 * [GUACAMOLE-741](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-741) - Spanish translation duplicates "APP.NAME" string
 * [GUACAMOLE-749](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-749) - Filter affects only the first level of the connection permission editor tree
 * [GUACAMOLE-764](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-764) - RDPDR file read/write may be truncated to 32 bits
 * [GUACAMOLE-772](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-772) - Reducing image Docker size for Guacd
 * [GUACAMOLE-783](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-783) - REST API responses are cached in IE 11
 * [GUACAMOLE-784](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-784) - Tolerate port number within X-Forwarded-For header
 * [GUACAMOLE-818](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-818) - Missing some files in the sftp file system
 * [GUACAMOLE-820](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-820) - Filters containing IP addresses do not match connection properties/parameters
 * [GUACAMOLE-846](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-846) - tunnel.uuid not initialized if tunnel becomes UNSTABLE
 * [GUACAMOLE-861](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-861) - Drive Redirection: WINDOWS_TIME wrong calculation
 * [GUACAMOLE-871](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-871) - Support cursor visiblity flag (DECTECM) in the terminal emulator
 * [GUACAMOLE-884](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-884) - Avoid Image where possible without performance penalty
 * [GUACAMOLE-889](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-889) - Mismatching attribute names in the LDAP schema
 * [GUACAMOLE-897](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-897) - Docker support for restricting authentication to database users only
 * [GUACAMOLE-955](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-955) - Untranslated error strings from extensions must not be interpreted as HTML
 * [GUACAMOLE-958](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-958) - Race in guacd client termination
 * [GUACAMOLE-1059](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1059) - Tolerate RDP protocol violations where possible

