---

released: false
title: 1.6.0
date: 2025-06-16 15:49:35 -0700
summary: >
    Improved rendering performance, improved Docker support, configurable case
    sensitivity, batch connection import, support Duo v4.

artifact-url: "https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/{}"
checksum-url: "https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/{}"
download-path: "guacamole/1.6.0-RC2/"
checksum-suffixes:
    "PGP"     : ".asc"
    "SHA-256" : ".sha256"

source-dist:
    - "source/guacamole-client-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "source/guacamole-server-1.6.0.tar.gz"

binary-dist:
    - "binary/guacamole-1.6.0.war"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-ban-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-duo-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-header-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-jdbc-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-json-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-ldap-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-quickconnect-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-sso-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-restrict-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-auth-totp-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-display-statistics-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-history-recording-storage-1.6.0.tar.gz"
    - "binary/guacamole-vault-1.6.0.tar.gz"

documentation:
    "Manual"              : "/doc/1.6.0/gug"
    "guacamole-common"    : "/doc/1.6.0/guacamole-common"
    "guacamole-common-js" : "/doc/1.6.0/guacamole-common-js"
    "guacamole-ext"       : "/doc/1.6.0/guacamole-ext"
    "libguac"             : "/doc/1.6.0/libguac"
    "libguac-terminal"    : "/doc/1.6.0/libguac-terminal"

---

The 1.6.0 release features improved rendering performance, improved Docker
support, configurable case sensitivity, and support for newer upstream library
releases like Duo v4. For a full list of all changes in this release, please
see the [changelog](#changelog) below.

**The 1.6.0 release is compatible with older 1.x components.** You should
upgrade older components to 1.6.0 when possible, however things should continue
to work correctly in the interim:

* Extensions written for older 1.x releases can be used by 1.6.0.
* Components written for the version of the Guacamole protocol used by older
  1.x releases can be used with components of the 1.6.0 release.

Regardless of inter-component compatibility, **there are changes in 1.6.0 which
may affect downstream users of Guacamole's APIs**. Please see the [deprecation
/ compatibility notes](#deprecation--compatibility-notes) section for more
information.

Highlights
----------

### Improved rendering performance

This latest release of Guacamole includes a major rewrite of the established
server-side protocol optimizer that has been part of guacd. Combined with
corresponding enhancements to the web application, the new rendering pipeline
is better able to leverage the server's processing power to increase
responsiveness while reducing the required network bandwidth.

Guacamole has nearly always had a built-in optimizer that used cost estimation
to rewrite and reorder graphical updates in a more efficient way. The new
optimizer builds on that basis, adding real time detection of
scrolling/movement, better heuristics for combining/splitting updates, and
automatic parallelization of the encoding process:

<div class="comparison">
    <figure>
        <h4>Rendering behavior <em>before</em> 1.6.0</h4>
        <video controls poster="/images/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-before-display-improvements.jpg">
            <source src="/videos/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-before-display-improvements.mp4" type="video/mp4"/>
            <source src="/videos/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-before-display-improvements.webm" type="video/webm"/>
            <img src="/images/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-before-display-improvements.jpg">
        </video>
        <figcaption>
            <p>The red highlight represents areas that are being updated using
encoded image data. Though the data is identical to image data already present,
it's not being reused since the VNC server doesn't recognize that scrolling is
occurring.</p>
            <p>The additional processing and bandwidth required on both server
and client results in a drop in frame rate.</p>
        </figcaption>
    </figure>
    <figure>
        <h4>Rendering behavior <em>after</em> 1.6.0</h4>
        <video controls poster="/images/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-after-display-improvements.jpg">
            <source src="/videos/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-after-display-improvements.mp4" type="video/mp4"/>
            <source src="/videos/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-after-display-improvements.webm" type="video/webm"/>
            <img src="/images/releases/1.6.0/guac-1.6.0-after-display-improvements.jpg">
        </video>
        <figcaption>
            <p>Here, the red highlight is still present for regions that cannot
be reused, but blue highlight appears representing areas that have been copied
from established data. This is done in real time despite the VNC server not
recognizing that scrolling has occurred. </p>
            <p>With less data being sent over the wire (and less data being
processed by the client), responsiveness improves while the additional
server-side processing is negligible.</p>
        </figcaption>
    </figure>
</div>

These improvements have been incorporated into the public API of libguac as
`guac_display` and have been made without requiring the use of a GPU. Instead,
they leverage a pool of worker threads, careful pipelining (to avoid encoding
blocking further processing of data), and a 2D variant of
[Rabin-Karp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rabin%E2%80%93Karp_algorithm)
combined with a purpose-built hash function.

 * Improve efficiency of streaming complex/large changes (Graphics Pipeline Extension, RemoteFX) ([GUACAMOLE-377](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-377))

### Improved containerized deployment options

The `guacamole/guacamole` Docker image has historically required manual mapping
of all environment variables that correspond to the configuration properties
used by `guacamole.properties`. This is now done automatically for _all_
properties, including any properties defined by third-party extensions. Every
property supported by Guacamole is now automatically pulled from an environment
variable within the provided Docker image.

For cases where third-party extensions are used, the `GUACAMOLE_HOME`
environment variable supported by the Docker image has been made more flexible,
with the standard `/etc/guacamole` usable by default without requiring
`GUACAMOLE_HOME` to be set at all.

Builds of the Docker image have also been expanded to support ARM CPUs, not
just x86.

 * Installing Guacamole with Docker improvements ([GUACAMOLE-374](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-374))
 * Provide pre-built images for ARM CPUs ([GUACAMOLE-1374](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1374))
 * Docker start script missing options ([GUACAMOLE-1733](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1733))

### Dedicated audit permission

For cases where otherwise unprivileged users must see the usage history for
Guacamole without having full system-level administration permissions, a new
`AUDIT` permission has been added to cover read-only access to history.
Granting this permission to a user allows them to see past usage without
implying any other permissions.

 * Add the ability to specify separate permissions for "History" and "Active sessions" tabs ([GUACAMOLE-538](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-538))

### Points of interest in session recordings

To allow administrators to more easily see where interesting parts of session
recordings might be, the in-browser session recording player now includes a
histogram above the playback timeline/bar that represents areas of greater
activity with peaks. If the recording contains key events, an additional
histogram that shows areas of keyboard activity is also included.

![A screenshot of Guacamole's in-browser session recording player showing
combined histograms of on-screen activity and keyboard activity.](/doc/1.6.0/gug/_images/player-key-events.png)

 * History Recording Player should indicate points of interest ([GUACAMOLE-1876](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1876))

### Batch import of connections from CSV, JSON, and YAML

Guacamole's administrative interface now includes an ["Import" button within
the "Connections" tab](/doc/1.6.0/gug/batch-import.html). Users with permission
to create connections within Guacamole can now use this button to import a
batch of connections from CSV, JSON, or YAML files that [conform to the
documented format](/doc/1.6.0/gug/batch-import.html), rather than manually
create each connection.

 * Support batch import of connections from CSV ([GUACAMOLE-926](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-926))

### Configurable case sensitivity

Whether Guacamole handles usernames and group names in a case-sensitive or
manner is now configurable globally using the `case-sensitivity` property (or
`CASE_SENSITIVITY` environment variable). This is particularly aimed at cases
where multiple authentication providers are involved that do not agree on
whether usernames are case-sensitive, such as when combining LDAP (typically
case-insensitive) with a PostgreSQL database (case-sensitive).

For sake of compatibility and not changing established behavior, Guacamole
defaults to case-sensitive username and group name handling.

 * Configurable username case sensitivity ([GUACAMOLE-1239](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1239))

### Complex access restrictions

Similar to the access restrictions provided by the database support, a separate
extension is now provided that allows [time-based and host-based restrictions](/doc/1.6.0/gug/auth-restrict.html)
to be enforced on users, user groups, connections, and balancing connection
groups. These restrictions can be used to determine the conditions required to
log into Guacamole or to limit when specific connections may be accessed.

 * Broadly configurable time limits for user logins and connection usage ([GUACAMOLE-1020](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1020))

### Migration to Duo Web SDK v4

Duo ceased supporting the previous version of their Web SDK (v2) and
implementations are required to migrate to the newer version (v4) or request
continued access to v2 on a limited basis. Guacamole has now migrated to v4 of
the Duo Web SDK.

**This new version of Duo's service is [fundamentally incompatible with Duo v2](#migration-to-duo-v4)
and uses different configuration options.** Users that have been using
Guacamole with Duo by requesting continued access to v2 will need to move
forward with switching to v4 and migrating their configuration. If necessary,
it is possible to continue using [the old version of the Duo extension](../1.5.5/)
to continue using Duo v2 until migration is possible.

 * Update guacamole-auth-duo to "Duo Web v4 SDK" ([GUACAMOLE-1289](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1289))

### Hidden clipboard contents

To better serve cases where private data may be copied into the clipboard, the
contents of the clipboard editor in the Guacamole menu are now hidden by
default. Clicking the clipboard editor reveals its contents, which will remain
visible until the Guacamole menu is closed.

 * Ensure clipboard contents are visible/accessible in Guacamole only when desired ([GUACAMOLE-1740](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1740))

Deprecation / Compatibility notes
---------------------------------

Each 1.x release of Apache Guacamole should be compatible with components of
older 1.x releases. This compatibility is intended at the Guacamole protocol
level and at the extension level, but not necessarily at the API level. This
means:

 * Extensions from older 1.x releases should still work in binary form, but may
   need code changes before their source will build against a newer version of
   guacamole-ext.
 * Software which uses the Guacamole protocol of an older 1.x release should
   still work.
 * Software which uses libguac from an older 1.x release should still work by
   continuing to use the libguac from that release, as newer versions of
   libguac may not be API/ABI compatible. In the case of third-party protocol
   support plugins for guacd, this means that the guacd from that release must
   also be used. Compatibility with respect to libguac is represented by the
   [soname](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soname).
 * You should update to newer versions where applicable and when possible.

As of 1.6.0, the following changes have been made which affect compatibility
with past releases:

### Migration to Duo v4

The new version of Duo's service uses different underlying mechanisms and
requires different configuration options. If using Duo, you will need to take
manual steps to update your configuration.

If you have been using the previous version of Guacamole's Duo integration,
**you can continue to use that integration until you can safely migrate**.

When ready to migrate, please read through [the updated documentation for using
Duo with Guacamole](/doc/1.6.0/gug/duo-auth.html). You will need to switch to
new configuration options, and the proper values for the new options will need
to be pulled from Duo's administrative interface. **Do not rely on simply
renaming the previous options** without first checking whether the old values
are still valid.

 * Update guacamole-auth-duo to "Duo Web v4 SDK" ([GUACAMOLE-1289](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1289))

### New `AUDIT` permission in database schema

The new audit-specific permission requires a new entry in the
`guacamole_system_permission_type` enum used by the various Guacamole database
implementations, which requires schema changes. To upgrade your database to the
latest version, run the relevant `upgrade-pre-1.6.0.sql` script against your
database.

Schema upgrade scripts are included for each database within the
`guacamole-auth-jdbc-1.6.0.tar.gz` archive provided above in the list of
downloads for this release.

 * Add the ability to specify separate permissions for "History" and "Active sessions" tabs ([GUACAMOLE-538](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-538))

### Deprecation of Docker links

The `--link` flag previously supported by Docker is considered deprecated.
Guacamole's Docker documentation has been updated to reflect this, and the
environment variables that result from using `--link` will now produce
deprecation warnings. If you have been using Docker links, you should migrate
away from that usage when possible.

 * Installing Guacamole with Docker improvements ([GUACAMOLE-374](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-374))

### Deprecation of `GUACD_LOG_LEVEL` and `LOGBACK_LEVEL` environment variables

The environment variables used by the `guacamole/guacd` and
`guacamole/guacamole` images were previously inconsistent with each other
(`GUACD_LOG_LEVEL` and `LOGBACK_LEVEL` respectively). These variables are now
both, simply, `LOG_LEVEL`. Continuing to use the old variables will produce
deprecation warnings.

 * Installing Guacamole with Docker improvements ([GUACAMOLE-374](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-374))

### Deprecation of `Credentials` getters/setters related to `HttpServletRequest`

As it is not reliable to attempt to access an `HttpServletRequest` outside the
scope of the handling of that actual request, the `getRequest()` and
`setRequest()` functions of the `Credentials` object have been deprecated. Also
deprecated are the setters that directly relate to HTTP request details:
`setRemoteAddress()`, `setRemoteHostname()`, and `setSession()`.

Extensions that use these functions of the `Credentials` object should migrate
to the `getRequestDetails()` and `setRequestDetails()` when possible.

 * {:.bug} Logging of request details fails with recent Tomcat ([GUACAMOLE-2052](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-2052))

### `guac_protocol_send_sync()` now requires an additional parameter

Rendered frames may sometimes be combined into a single frame to compensate for
any client-side lag, such as a browser being unable to process a frame as
quickly as it was generated. To allow remote frame rate to be tracked in
addition to the client frame rate, a new parameter has been added to
`guac_protocol_send_sync()` which accepts the logical number of frames that
went into the current frame.

 * Improve efficiency of streaming complex/large changes (Graphics Pipeline Extension, RemoteFX) ([GUACAMOLE-377](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-377))

### `guac_recording_create()` and `guac_terminal_create_typescript()` now require an additional parameter

To serve use cases where session recordings or typescripts need to be written
to files that already exist, such as a named pipe or FIFO, the
`guac_recording_create()` and `guac_terminal_create_typescript()` functions
have been updated to require an additional parameter dictating whether this is
permitted. Previously, attempting to write to an existing file would result in
a numeric suffix being appended to the filename to resolve the filename
collision.

 * Allow writing recordings to existing files ([GUACAMOLE-1931](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1931))

### `guac_client` structure size change

Internal members of the `guac_client` structure have changed, affecting its
overall size and offsets of established, non-internal structure members.

**All code using `guac_client` will need to be recompiled to be compatible.**

 * Improve efficiency of streaming complex/large changes (Graphics Pipeline Extension, RemoteFX) ([GUACAMOLE-377](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-377))

### `guac_socket` structure size change

Internal members of the `guac_socket` structure have changed, affecting its
overall size. Offsets of established, non-internal structure members are not
affected.

It is unlikely that any external code manually allocates instances of this
structure and passes those instances back to libguac, but any such code would
need to be rebuilt to be compatible.

 * Base64 encoding of image/binary data results in excessive syscalls that can degrade performance ([GUACAMOLE-1776](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1776))

Changelog
---------

### User interface / platform

 * Add the ability to specify separate permissions for "History" and "Active sessions" tabs ([GUACAMOLE-538](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-538))
 * Support batch import of connections from CSV ([GUACAMOLE-926](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-926))
 * Add parameter token for connection name ([GUACAMOLE-1177](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1177))
 * Provide audit log for system modifications ([GUACAMOLE-1224](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1224))
 * Configurable username case sensitivity ([GUACAMOLE-1239](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1239))
 * Provide chunked file upload mechanism ([GUACAMOLE-1320](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1320))
 * Display whether user groups are disabled in group list ([GUACAMOLE-1479](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1479))
 * Support for true fullscreen mode and keyboard lock ([GUACAMOLE-1525](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1525))
 * Allow branding/customization of the section headers on the user home page ([GUACAMOLE-1584](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1584))
 * Add support for specifying VNC "encodings" parameter in webapp UI ([GUACAMOLE-1642](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1642))
 * Automatically clear view if session expires in background ([GUACAMOLE-1744](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1744))
 * Base64 encoding of image/binary data results in excessive syscalls that can degrade performance ([GUACAMOLE-1776](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1776))
 * Update session recording playback progress during large frame gaps ([GUACAMOLE-1803](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1803))
 * Enable viewing / searching of key events in session recording playback ([GUACAMOLE-1820](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1820))
 * Improvements to the "Recent connections" section ([GUACAMOLE-1866](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1866))
 * History Recording Player should indicate points of interest ([GUACAMOLE-1876](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1876))
 * Enhance client custom field functionality ([GUACAMOLE-1904](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1904))
 * Provide notification, jump-to-top of page for a clone operation ([GUACAMOLE-1916](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1916))
 * {:.bug} Logging of request details fails with recent Tomcat ([GUACAMOLE-2052](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-2052))

### Docker images

 * Installing Guacamole with Docker improvements ([GUACAMOLE-374](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-374))
 * Provide pre-built images for ARM CPUs ([GUACAMOLE-1374](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1374))
 * Docker start script missing options ([GUACAMOLE-1733](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1733))
 * Ensure clipboard contents are visible/accessible in Guacamole only when desired ([GUACAMOLE-1740](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1740))
 * {:.bug} Unable to login on build from main branch ([GUACAMOLE-1978](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1978))

### Authentication, integration, and storage

 * Ensure GUAC_DATE/GUAC_TIME tokens match connection startDate ([GUACAMOLE-61](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-61))
 * Add Proxy Hostname and Port to LDAP Extension ([GUACAMOLE-577](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-577))
 * Add webapp support for smart card authentication ([GUACAMOLE-839](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-839))
 * Enforce rate limit on authentication attempts ([GUACAMOLE-990](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-990))
 * Broadly configurable time limits for user logins and connection usage ([GUACAMOLE-1020](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1020))
 * Randomize generation of TOTP key until enrollment is confirmed ([GUACAMOLE-1068](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1068))
 * Allow TOTP to be disabled by group membership ([GUACAMOLE-1219](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1219))
 * Update guacamole-auth-duo to "Duo Web v4 SDK" ([GUACAMOLE-1289](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1289))
 * SAML module should be able to encrypt and sign requests ([GUACAMOLE-1372](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1372))
 * Allow LDAP extension to configure TLS level ([GUACAMOLE-1488](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1488))
 * Clarify TOTP reset/status logic ([GUACAMOLE-1550](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1550))
 * Allow JDBC Auth Extensions to track history for external connections ([GUACAMOLE-1616](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1616))
 * Allow extraction of "domain" token from vault extensions ([GUACAMOLE-1623](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1623))
 * Enable more granular vault associations ([GUACAMOLE-1629](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1629))
 * Allow use of KSM one-time tokens in guacamole-vault-ksm extension ([GUACAMOLE-1643](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1643))
 * Allow per-user KSM Vault configurations ([GUACAMOLE-1656](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1656))
 * KSM vault extension should allow searching records by domain ([GUACAMOLE-1661](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1661))
 * Allow user to configure Keeper Secrets Manager call frequency ([GUACAMOLE-1722](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1722))
 * Enforce user access windows even when already logged in ([GUACAMOLE-1723](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1723))
 * Add SSO providers list to UI at most once ([GUACAMOLE-1757](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1757))
 * Allow TOTP and SAML auth to be used together ([GUACAMOLE-1780](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1780))
 * {:.bug} KSM Vault extension doesn't support private key from "PAM User" record type ([GUACAMOLE-1795](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1795))
 * Map JWT claims from OpenID Connect as parameter tokens ([GUACAMOLE-1844](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1844))
 * Allow MFA to be bypassed or enforced based on client IP ([GUACAMOLE-1855](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1855))
 * Add parameter token for domain of LDAP user ([GUACAMOLE-1881](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1881))
 * Disable autofill on TOTP verification code field ([GUACAMOLE-1946](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1946))
 * Provide a comprehensive error message for input exceeding database column ([GUACAMOLE-1948](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1948))

### Protocol support / guacd

 * Allow selection of whole words by double-clicking ([GUACAMOLE-192](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-192))
 * Improve efficiency of streaming complex/large changes (Graphics Pipeline Extension, RemoteFX) ([GUACAMOLE-377](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-377))
 * Allow specifying connection timeout ([GUACAMOLE-600](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-600))
 * Add support for FreeRDP 3.0.0 ([GUACAMOLE-1026](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1026))
 * {:.bug} Connecting to unpublished RemoteApp results in black screen ([GUACAMOLE-1084](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1084))
 * {:.bug} Add support for right modifier keys to SSH/Telnet ([GUACAMOLE-1113](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1113))
 * Add auto resize to VNC sessions ([GUACAMOLE-1196](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1196))
 * RemoteApp windows become inaccessible after being minimized ([GUACAMOLE-1231](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1231))
 * {:.bug} Lines of file gets broken when navigating back and forth using a text editor ([GUACAMOLE-1256](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1256))
 * Add option to the vnc protocol to disable remote input ([GUACAMOLE-1267](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1267))
 * Add support for SSH certificates ([GUACAMOLE-1290](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1290))
 * Add parameter for specifying known RDP server certificate/fingerprint ([GUACAMOLE-1332](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1332))
 * {:.bug} "AltGr" received as "Alt" if remote keyboard layout lacks "AltGr" ([GUACAMOLE-1473](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1473))
 * {:.bug} Terminal emulator adds newlines when copying a wrapped line of text ([GUACAMOLE-1586](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1586))
 * Add small margins to SSH sessions ([GUACAMOLE-1622](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1622))
 * {:.bug} Text copied from terminal emulator may incorrectly omit indentation ([GUACAMOLE-1632](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1632))
 * Add terminal support for alternate screen buffer ([GUACAMOLE-1633](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1633))
 * {:.bug} SFTP+VNC broken when built with OpenSSL versions >= 1.1.0 ([GUACAMOLE-1652](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1652))
 * Clipboard normalization support for SSH connections ([GUACAMOLE-1682](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1682))
 * Test machine availability when sending Wake-on-LAN packet ([GUACAMOLE-1686](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1686))
 * {:.bug} Japanese characters display garbled in terminal when using guacd docker image ([GUACAMOLE-1726](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1726))
 * Add parameters for VNC compression and quality levels ([GUACAMOLE-1760](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1760))
 * Terminal protocols should support mac-style cmd+v paste shortcut ([GUACAMOLE-1804](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1804))
 * Ignore Ctrl+Shift+C within terminal emulator ([GUACAMOLE-1805](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1805))
 * Allow writing recordings to existing files ([GUACAMOLE-1931](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1931))
 * {:.bug} RDP connection fails when microphone input is enabled ([GUACAMOLE-1940](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1940))
 * {:.bug} Selected text in SSH is offset from cursor position ([GUACAMOLE-1944](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1944))
 * {:.bug} Multiple wheel events per mouse wheel tick ([GUACAMOLE-1967](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1967))
 * {:.bug} FreeRDP may invoke EndPaint without BeginPaint as of 3.8.0 ([GUACAMOLE-1997](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1997))

### Internationalization

 * {:.bug} Japanese keyboard layout for RDP incorrect ([GUACAMOLE-520](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-520))
 * Add support for Canadian french keyboard layout ([GUACAMOLE-1312](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1312))
 * Update French translations ([GUACAMOLE-1611](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1611))
 * Fix some typos in italian translation and improve it ([GUACAMOLE-1612](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1612))
 * Updated czech translation ([GUACAMOLE-1664](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1664))
 * Updated german translation ([GUACAMOLE-1692](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1692))
 * Add Czech keyboard layout ([GUACAMOLE-1708](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1708))
 * Polish translation ([GUACAMOLE-1730](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1730))
 * Updated czech translation ([GUACAMOLE-1758](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1758))
 * Add Romanian keymap to RDP protocol ([GUACAMOLE-1770](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1770))
 * Add Portuguese keymap to RDP protocol ([GUACAMOLE-1771](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1771))
 * Update the Simplified Chinese translation ([GUACAMOLE-1778](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1778))
 * Update the Simplified Chinese translation for totp auth extension ([GUACAMOLE-1781](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1781))
 * Updated czech translation ([GUACAMOLE-1792](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1792))
 * {:.bug} Mac Firefox repeats composed characters ([GUACAMOLE-1810](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1810))

### Documentation

 * Docker instructions shall stop using --link to link containers ([GUACAMOLE-531](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-531))
 * Add missing WEBAPP_CONTEXT variable in docker setup documentation ([GUACAMOLE-1680](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1680))
 * Document RemoteIPValve to cover IPv4 and IPv6 ([GUACAMOLE-1861](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1861))

### General housekeeping and cleanup

 * Provide GuacamoleProperty List Implementations ([GUACAMOLE-1006](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1006))
 * Expose client state enum values ([GUACAMOLE-1402](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1402))
 * Guacamole manual: Makefile: "find" uses non-POSIX arguments ([GUACAMOLE-1501](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1501))
 * {:.bug} Phantomjs build issues on ubuntu 22.04 ([GUACAMOLE-1614](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1614))
 * Remove usage of AccessController ([GUACAMOLE-1716](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1716))
 * {:.bug} Correct autoconf issues that result in odd build results ([GUACAMOLE-1719](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1719))
 * Stop storing unnecessary auth response data in local storage ([GUACAMOLE-1721](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1721))
 * {:.bug} Projects outside scope of 1.5.0 fail to build following merge of version number bump ([GUACAMOLE-1731](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1731))
 * Automatically test pull requests using Github Actions ([GUACAMOLE-1754](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1754))
 * {:.bug} Projects outside scope of 1.5.1 fail to build following merge of version number bump ([GUACAMOLE-1767](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1767))
 * {:.bug} SQLSERVER_BATCH_SIZE defined twice in SQLServerGuacamoleProperties ([GUACAMOLE-1789](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1789))
 * {:.bug} Projects outside scope of 1.5.2 fail to build following merge of version number bump ([GUACAMOLE-1790](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1790))
 * {:.bug} Projects outside scope of 1.5.3 fail to build following merge of version number bump ([GUACAMOLE-1829](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1829))
 * {:.bug} Merge conflict markers left in guacamole-manual source ([GUACAMOLE-1833](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1833))
 * KSM Vault extension should support new PAM Hostname field type ([GUACAMOLE-1868](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1868))
 * Align libraries on "Library status" output ([GUACAMOLE-1869](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1869))
 * Check return values of WebP API functions ([GUACAMOLE-1875](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1875))
 * {:.bug} Projects outside scope of 1.5.4 fail to build following merge of version number bump ([GUACAMOLE-1887](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1887))
 * Bump versions for projects outside the 1.5.5 scope ([GUACAMOLE-1915](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1915))
 * Add support for FFmpeg 7.0 ([GUACAMOLE-1952](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1952))
 * Update dependencies to latest stable and compatible versions ([GUACAMOLE-1956](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1956))
 * Bump versions to 1.6.0 ([GUACAMOLE-1980](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1980))
 * {:.bug} Compile error in src/protocols/rdp/channels/rail.c ([GUACAMOLE-1982](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1982))
 * Upgrade KSM SDK to latest (v16.6.5) ([GUACAMOLE-1984](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/GUACAMOLE-1984))

